Add documentation page "Writing Custom Middleware" (#4498)
reduxjs/redux: docs/usage/WritingCustomMiddleware.md

---
id: writing-custom-middleware
title: Writing Custom Middleware
---

# Writing Custom Middleware

:::tip What You'll Learn

- When to use custom middleware
- Standard patterns for middleware
- How to make sure that your middleware is compatible with other Redux projects

:::

Middleware in Redux can be mainly used to either

> - create side effects for actions, or to
> - modify or cancel actions.

Author: ```suggestion
- create side effects for actions,
- modify or cancel actions, or to
- modify the input accepted by dispatch.
```

Most use cases fall into the first category: For example [Redux-Saga](https://github.com/redux-saga/redux-saga/), [redux-observable](https://github.com/redux-observable/redux-observable), and [RTK listener middleware](https://redux-toolkit.js.org/api/createListenerMiddleware) all create side effects that react to actions. These examples also show that this is a very common need: To be able to react to an action other than with a state change.

> The most obvious example for modifying actions is [Redux Thunk](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk), which transforms a function returning an action into an action by calling it. But it can also be used to e.g. enhance an action with information from the state or from an external input.

Reviewer: :hand: I'd add a third category - "teaching `dispatch` how to understand values that are _not_ plain action objects", and put thunks into that.  "Modifying an action" to me would be something like debouncing / throttling / gating an action, or literally mutating it.

> The most obvious example for modifying actions is [Redux Thunk](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk), which transforms a function returning an action into an action by calling it. But it can also be used to e.g. enhance an action with information from the state or from an external input.

Author: ```suggestion
Modifying actions can be used to e.g. enhance an action with information from the state or from an external input, or to throttle, debounce or gate them.

The most obvious example for modifying the input of dispatch is [Redux Thunk](https://github.com/reduxjs/redux-thunk), which transforms a function returning an action into an action by calling it.
```

You might still want to use custom middleware in one of two cases:

1. If you only have a single, very simple side effect, it might not be worth it to add a full additional framework. Just make sure that you switch to an existing framework once your application grows instead of growing your own custom solution.
2. If you need to modify or cancel actions.

## Standard patterns for middleware

Middleware roughly works like this:

```ts
const middleware: Middleware = api => next => action => {
  // Do something before the action hits the reducer and the next middlewares
  const beforeState = api.getState()
  beforeSideEffect(action, beforeState)
  // Do something with the action before passing it along
  const enhancedAction = enhance(action, beforeState, api)
  let response: unknown
  // Pass the action along, or cancel it by not passing it
  if (!shouldCancelAction(enhancedAction, beforeState)) {
    response = next(enhancedAction)
  }
  // Do something after the action hits the reducer
  const afterState = api.getState()
  afterSideEffect(action, afterState, api)

  // Do something with the dispatch function return value

>   return enhanceDispatch(response, api)

Reviewer: :question: not sure I understand what `enhanceDispatch` is here, or where it's coming from

Author: ```suggestion
  return enhanceDispatchReturnValue(response, api)
```

Maybe this works better? Basically you can modify the return value of a dispatch function.

Reviewer: I think there's still a couple things that bother me about this example.

One is that there's no indication what any of these functions do or where they're coming from. I think I understand what you're _trying_ to show - that you can run side effects before and after calling `next()`, etc.  I'm just not sure this example as written is the best way to explain that.

Second is that the `enhance` and `enhanceDispatch` functions in particular are very confusing even after re-reading this a few times.  I _think_ that `enhance` is trying to indicate that you can mutate the contents of the action.  I still don't know what `enhanceDispatchReturnValue` is supposed to do.

I think I'd much rather have this whole example explicitly show "real" examples of each kind of a thing, with comments right above each line explaining "here's an example of a side effect before calling `next(action)`", etc.  In other words, instead of calling a made-up function called `enhance(action)`, I'd rather see something like `action.meta.someField = 123`.  Similar for the side effect checks.

I don't immediately have good suggestions for what those examples ought to be.

Author: This example tries to cover all the points where you can "hook" into the lifecycle. E.g. `enhanceDispatchReturnValue` is used by redux-thunk to make dispatch awaitable. But most middlewares will only use one or maybe two of these points.
I like the idea of concrete examples. Maybe we could split it into the following:

1. `afterSideEffect` is very common, we could e.g. use RTK listener middleware for this.
2. `beforeSideEffect` is very similar to `afterSideEffect`, but I haven't seen this in use anywhere yet, as it doesn't allow access to the state after the action went through the reducer, so I would need help to find an example
3. `enhance` and `enhanceDispatch` can both be shown with Redux Thunk middleware
4. For stopping execution, I don't have a good example. Maybe something from RTK query? I don't have deep enough understanding of that code base for a good example, though.

Reviewer: I'm okay with miniature examples, I'm just thinking it would be helpful if they showed actually _doing_ something instead of calling functions that don't actually exist in the code block :)

Author: I'll add a separate comment with a suggestion.

```ts
const middleware: Middleware = api => next => action => {
  // Do something before the action hits the reducer and the next middlewares
  const beforeState = api.getState()
  beforeSideEffect(action, beforeState, api)
  return next(action)
}
```

### Late side effect

```ts
const middleware: Middleware = api => next => action => {
  const response = next(action)

  // Do something after the action hits the reducer
  const afterState = api.getState()
  afterSideEffect(action, afterState, api)

  return response
}
```

## Rules to make compatible middleware

In principle, middleware is a very powerful pattern and can do whatever it wants with an action. Existing middleware might have assumptions about what happens in the middleware around it, though, and being aware of these assumptions will make it easier to ensure that your middleware works well with existing commonly used middleware.

There are two contact points between our middleware and the other middlewares:

### Calling the next middleware

When you call `next`, the middleware will expect some form of action. Unless you want to explicitly modify it, just pass through the action that you received.

> More subtly, some middlewares except that the middleware is called on the same tick as `dispatch` is called, so next should be called synchronously by your middleware.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More subtly, some middlewares expect that the middleware is called on the same tick as `dispatch` is called, so `next` should be called synchronously by your middleware.
```

### Returning the dispatch return value

> Unless the middleware needs to explicitly modify the return value of `dispatch`, just return what you get from `next`. It you do need to modify the return value, then your middleware anyway will need to sit in a very specific spot in the middleware chain to be able to do what it is supposed to, so you will need to check compatability with all other middlewares manually and decide how they could work together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unless the middleware needs to explicitly modify the return value of `dispatch`, just return what you get from `next`. If you do need to modify the return value, then your middleware will need to sit in a very specific spot in the middleware chain to be able to do what it is supposed to - you will need to check compatibility with all other middlewares manually and decide how they could work together.
```

This has a tricky consequence:

```ts
const middleware: Middleware = api => next => async action => {
  const response = next(action)

  // Do something after the action hits the reducer
  const afterState = api.getState()

>   if (action.type === 'REQUEST_FETCH') {

Author: ```suggestion
  if (action.type === 'some/action') {
```

    const data = await fetchData()
    api.dispatch(dataFetchedAction(data))
  }

  return response
}
```

> Even though it looks like we didn't modify the response, we actually did: Due to async-await, it is now a promise. This will break some middlewares like e.g. the one from RTK query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though it looks like we didn't modify the response, we actually did: Due to async-await, it is now a promise. This will break some middlewares like the one from RTK Query.
```

> So how to write this middleware?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, how can we write this middleware instead?
```

```ts
const middleware: Middleware = api => next => action => {
  const response = next(action)

  // Do something after the action hits the reducer
  const afterState = api.getState()

>   if (action.type === 'REQUEST_FETCH') {

Reviewer: :hand: I'd suggest using RTK-style `"some/action"` constants throughout the page for consistency

>   if (action.type === 'REQUEST_FETCH') {

Author: ```suggestion
  if (action.type === 'some/action') {
```

>     void loadData(api)

Reviewer: :hand: Don't think the `void` is needed here

Author: See discussion below. I'll resolve this one to avoid having to look in two places.

  }

  return response
}

async function loadData(api) {
  const data = await fetchData()
  api.dispatch(dataFetchedAction(data))
}
```

> Just move out the async logic into a separate function so that you can still use async-await, but don't actually wait for the promise to resolve in the middleware. `void` indicates to others reading the code that you decided to not await the promise explicitly without having an effect on the code.

Reviewer: :speech_balloon: hmm. tbh I've never seen that `void` pattern used before 🤷‍♂️

Author: It's recommended e.g. by [this eslint rule](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/no-floating-promises/) that is part of eslint's configuration set [`recommended-requiring-type-checking`](https://typescript-eslint.io/linting/configs/#recommended-requiring-type-checking). I've also seen it in other codebases as a nice convention.

## Next Steps

> If you haven't yet, take a look at [the Middleware section in Understanding Redux](../understanding/history-and-design/middleware.md) to understand how middleware works below the hood.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you haven't yet, take a look at [the Middleware section in Understanding Redux](../understanding/history-and-design/middleware.md) to understand how middleware works under the hood.
```
